# GIS Analysis between Education and Socioeconomic class in LA

## To Run the Code:

Make sure you are able to run R. I used the link [https://www.r-project.org/](https://www.r-project.org/) to download R compatible to my computer and used R Studio to run my codes (which you can download here: [https://posit.co/download/rstudio-desktop/](https://posit.co/download/rstudio-desktop/)). There are also a number of libraries I also used in the code (which you can get). 

## Background, Methods, Results (Summarized)

I attempt to answer if there is a relationship between schools and their location in Los Angeles. Would socioeconomic and racial composition of an area in LA affect the number of schools there are for students in that area? I look to see if more affluent areas have more academic resources and if more diverse communities in Los Angeles have the same amount of educational resources as less diverse communities. 

I used Los Angeles’ GeoHub as the main source of datasets, including their 2018 demographic records per census tract and 2020 income per capita (the average income per person in the census tract). I intended to map out general educational resources, but narrowed this down to schools for K-12 for the scope of this project. I included private, public (which included magnet), and charter schools, of which were datasets already in Los Angeles’ GeoHub. Because Los Angeles county has more than 80 cities, I narrowed my scope by choosing public schools in LAUSD (Los Angeles’ main public school district) and private schools within metropolitan Los Angeles. To see any type of disparity between schools and socioeconomic status, I took the top 50 highest and 50 lowest income per capita census tracts and plotted them using two color palettes (warm for highest incomes and blue for the lowest incomes) with their associated school densities. I also mapped these tracts with associated school number counts to show the difference in school availability per student in each tract, which shows the significance of school density rather than school count. Lastly, I mapped out school densities per tract with its minority composition.

With school densities and income for all the census tracts in Los Angeles that included information on income and demographics, a tract in the Pacific Palisades had the highest school density in its area at 3.33%. School densities are typically higher in the center of Los Angeles, with more neighborhoods from Pacific Palisades, Melrose, Hollywood, and Brentwood. Another aspect to note is that South East LA, despite having a concentration of schools, has a smaller school density. These tracts have much more children in them, yet schools are not as equally distributed compared to their West LA counterparts. Aside from Pacific Palisades, there are no substantial differences in school densities per tract. While there was no substantial difference between school density and income per capita in tracts, further analysis could be done to explore patterns in school densities and minority populations in tracts.
